### Exercise: [Bowling kata](http://codingdojo.org/kata/Bowling/)

<backgroundimage>{{ site.github.url }}/images/big_lebowski.jpg</backgroundimage>
<backgroundimageopacity>0.35</backgroundimageopacity>

Write code to calculate the ***total*** score for a valid sequence of rolls of American Ten-Pin Bowling.

Don’t check for valid rolls, correct number of rolls/frames.

<a href="https://pavelsokov.com/workszoom/2592484#/" class="photo-license-url" rel="license cc:license" target="_newtab">
    <span style="font-size: .25em">*Background image - Some rights reserved</span>
</a>

--

<backgroundimage>{{ site.github.url }}/images/bowling_score_sheet.svg</backgroundimage>

## 10 frames</h2>
(usually two rolls in each)


--

<!-- .slide: data-background-size="contain" -->
<!-- .slide: data-background-repeat="no-repeat" -->
<backgroundimage>{{ site.github.url }}/images/bowlspare.png</backgroundimage>
<backgroundimageopacity>0.35</backgroundimageopacity>

## If a ***spare***
(all pins knocked over in two rolls)

* Then the value of the first roll in the next frame is added to this one.

* In final frame, extend the frame by one bonus ball


--

<!-- .slide: data-background-size="contain" -->
<!-- .slide: data-background-repeat="no-repeat" -->
<backgroundimage>{{ site.github.url }}/images/bowlstrike.png</backgroundimage>
<backgroundimageopacity>0.35</backgroundimageopacity>

## If a ***strike***
(all pins knocked over in one roll)

* Frame finishes and value of the next two rolls are added to this frame

* In final frame, extend the frame by two bonus balls

--

## Try it out

+ Physical set of bowls
+ [Bowling Genius bowling calculator](https://www.bowlinggenius.com/)

Note: Mentors to guide the TDD process.  
  Write up some examples on a flip chart first to help them understand the bowling. They probably won’t get this far but you could cover the case of a triple strike in the last frame  
  Suggest they use a collection / varchar of numbers as the interface to their solution.  

--

## Review

+ Bowling scoring is weird / hard
+ Strikes and spares are peculiar
+ Scoring involves time-travel
+ Game length varies

--

## Points to note

+ We will not check for valid rolls.
+ We will not check for correct number of rolls and frames.
+ We will not provide scores for intermediate frames.
+ Having some notion of a frame should make things easier...

Notes:
    Don't forget modelling techniques nouns and verbs etc.  
    Physical bowling pins  
    Scoring is hard it involves time-travel see http://codingdojo.org/kata/Bowling/ "Quote"  

--

## Where do we start?

+ First we write a test
+ What should it be?

Notes:
    Canvas opinion from the audience.  

--

## The first test

```javascript
const rolls = [0,0, 0,0, 0,0, 0,0, 0,0,
               0,0, 0,0, 0,0, 0,0, 0,0];

expect(bowl(rolls)).toBe(0);

```

--

### Exercise (25mins) - Fork and implement first test

* If you haven’t already, _**fork**_ this repo into your own repository
  https://github.com/MCR-Digital/apprentice-bootcamp-fundamentals-2
* Clone your newly created repository onto your local machine
* Open the appropriate language directory from the `exercises` directory using your IDE
* Add the first test to empty test file and make it pass

```javascript
const rolls = [0,0, 0,0, 0,0, 0,0, 0,0,
               0,0, 0,0, 0,0, 0,0, 0,0];
expect(bowl(rolls)).toBe(0);
```

--

## Review

+ Did your first test fail?
+ A test hasn’t passed until it’s failed
+ Could you have made the test pass in an easier way?

Note: Ask if anyone wrote some code to make it pass—point out that they could just return zero.  

--

## What next?

+ _**Refactor?**_
+ Another test.
+ What should it be?
+ Make it fail, then pass again before you write the second test

Note: Point out that sometimes we aren’t running the tests we think we are  

--

## The second test

```javascript
const rolls = [1,1, 1,1, 1,1, 1,1, 1,1,
               1,1, 1,1, 1,1, 1,1, 1,1];

expect(bowl(rolls)).toBe(20);
```

--

### Exercise (10mins) - Implement second test

* Commit once your first test passes
* Remember to refactor
* Add the second test and make it pass
* Remember to refactor

```javascript
const rolls = [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,
    1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1];
expect(bowl(rolls)).toBe(20);
```

Note: Lunch followed this slide

--

## Review

+ How hard was it to make the second test pass?
+ What refactoring did people do?

Note: live coding coming up—remember to share whole screen  

--

## What next?

+ _**Refactor**_
+ Another test.
+ What should it be?

--

## The third test

+ Test a single _spare_
```javascript
const rolls = [5,5, 1,0, 0,0, 0,0, 0,0,      
               0,0, 0,0, 0,0, 0,0, 0,0];
expect(bowl(rolls)).toBe(12);
```
+ Why are the following rolls zero?

Note: Score this with https://www.bowlinggenius.com/  
    Demonstrate adding this failing test and discuss the problem of not having a frame  
    Following rolls are zero to have as little code to describe the scenario  

--

## We need a frame

+ Not possible to implement spare code without grouping rolls
+ How can we do it?
  + The roll after the spare adds to the spare frame
+ How should we introduce this change?
  + Tests are failing—need them to pass before refactoring
  + Disable the test, change the code
  + Use tests to ensure it still works

--

## Demo: add concept of frame

* Disable failing test
* Refactor to introduce frame
* Tests should continue to pass

Note: Be explicit about whether they should follow along or just watch.  
  Disable the failing third test.  
  Change the code so that the loop steps through two rolls at a time.  
  Add both rolls to the result.  
  Don’t implement the code for the third test!  

--

### Exercise (20mins) - Third test preparation

* Remember to commit if your second test passes
* Add the third test and note that it’s hard to implement
* Disable the third test
* Refactor to introduce the concept of a frame
  * Just change it to look at two rolls at a time
  * Don’t overcomplicate it! 
* We’ll review as a group before enabling the third test

Note: It’s absolutely valid to engineer a better solution, but the point today is focussing on the steps of TDD, not looking for a perfect solution.

--

## Review

+ Who struggled to implement a frame?

--

## What next?

+ Enable third test
+ Make it pass

--

### Exercise (20mins) - Third test

* Remember to commit
* Enable the third test and make it pass
* Remember to refactor

```javascript
const rolls = [5, 5, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
    0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0];
expect(bowl(rolls)).toBe(12);
```

--

## Review

+ Why did we disable the third test?
+ How did the first two tests help us?
+ How have people made the test pass?

--

## What next?

+ _**Refactor**_
+ Another test.
+ What should it be?

--

## The fourth test

+ Test a single _strike_
```javascript
const rolls = [10, 1,1, 0,0, 0,0, 0,0,      
               0,0, 0,0, 0,0, 0,0, 0,0];
expect(bowl(rolls)).toBe(14);
```
+ What are the challenges?

Note: Talk about how the first frame is no longer two rolls. Give them the option to make it easier by adding a dummy empty roll after the strike. Might need to change how the 

--

### Exercise (20mins) - Fourth test

* Commit once your third test passes
* Remember to refactor
* Add the fourth test and make it pass
* Run your tests regularly
* Remember to refactor

```javascript
const rolls = [10, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
    0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0];
expect(bowl(rolls)).toBe(14);
```

--

## Exercise: final frame (optional)

If you managed all of that…
* Look at the special behaviour around the final frame
* Try to follow red, green, refactor

```javascript
const strikes = [10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 
                 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10];
expect(bowl(strikes)).toBe(300);

const allFives = [5,5, 5,5, 5,5, 5,5, 5,5, 5,5, 
                  5,5, 5,5, 5,5, 5,5, 5,5, 5,5, 5];
expect(bowl(allFives)).toBe(150);
```

Note: In most cases implementing the previous rules will cause the final frame to work by default. This won’t take them long to realise, and will probably confuse them. Worth discussing.

--

## Review

+ Who found it hard?
+ Was it hard to follow the Red/Green/Refactor cycle? Why?
+ How many tests did you write / how many cycles?
+ Who wrote code without a failing test?
